flesh:Like many other living creatures, domestic pigs in The Zone underwent serious mutations following the second Chernobyl disaster, affecting genes responsible for their metabolism. This eventually caused the animal's phenotype to change significantly.
blind dog:Several generations of the dog species have lived and died since the catastrophe. Each was more affected by the Zone than the previous one. Rapid mutation lead to a vast improvement in previously peripheral abilities, frequently at the expense of primary ones. The most notable biological change was the loss of sight, paired with an uncanny development of smell. As it turned out, blind pups survived in the Zone as well as normal ones, if not better. As a result, the common dog quickly became extinct in the Zone, giving way to a new breed ▒ that of blind dogs. The animals instinctively identify and avoid anomalies, radiation, and other invisible dangers that plague the Zone. Like their wild ancestors ▒ the wolves ▒ blind dogs hunt in packs. An encounter with a large group of these animals can be dangerous even to an experienced and well-armed stalker.
boar:A large animal which can reach 1.5 meters at the shoulder. The boar's ability to survive and aggression surpassess all of its relatives living outside the area, and resembles that of most mutants. Mutagenic processes engineered by radiation and anomalies have played a significant part in shaping these mammals: they have lost all fur in a few places and grown long, bristly fur in others. The animal's hooves have changed in shape and become sharper, acquiring a resemblance to claws. Also, their pupils have become colorless, while both pigmentation disorders and deep wrinkles have appeared on their bald heads. They have also grown an extra pair of tusks which are easily recognized.
pseudodog:As their name suggests, they look more like dogs than wolves; they have very blunt and short muzzles, relatively short fur (but far more than a blind dog) and are unusually small for a wolf-related canine as they are only slightly bigger than blind dogs. They have some exposed skin on the ribs which is not covered by fur, and their cheeks do not completely cover their teeth (or they are constantly snarling). Also, pseudodogs have rather small ears which do not stick straight up which is also very different from most wolves. Another distinguishing feature are their eyes, which implies that they can indeed see (unlike blind dogs). A pseudodog's eyes are a glowing, whitish yellow color remarkably similar to a Bloodsucker's. Curiously, they stop glowing when it's badly injured or killed.
rodent:Determining the species from which the Zone's rodents developed has so far proved impossible although it can be said with certainty that their ancestors were gregarious mammals. Although these animals are similar with jerboas in appearance, there is no relation between them. Although some stalkers like Inquisitor, a mutant zoo keeper, refers to them as jerboas. As evidenced in X18, it is suggested a good number these rodents were originally test subjects before the Chernobyl incident. After high dosages of radiation transformed these beasts into what they are now, the mutated rodents most likely escaped and wreak havoc in the Zone.
chimera:Chimera is a hairless cat/dog-like creature, close to the size of an adult lion, with two heads and a broad tail. Chimeras are extremely strong and they're able to turn a car over alone. They are the most deadly mutant encountered, jumping incredible distances and doing extreme damage. Though physically weaker than the Pseudogiant, the Chimera is considered deadlier due to its extremely fast speeds and aggressiveness.
cat:They have a mutated pair of fang-like glands on the side of their mouths which they use to attack, along with their teeth. It is assumed they attack by biting the player, similar to blind dogs, and that they also let forth a loud "meow" when attacking.
rat:Just a radioactive rat.
crow:Crows have described to be the only species of birds that managed to survive the Zone harsh environment. It is believed by local scientists that crows rely on their own senses to spot airborne anomalies and avoid them. Even though described as mutants, they do not interact with the player in all games. They can be found flying in groups, especially above bases. They can be shot and killed, although they cannot be looted for parts.
psy dog:It resembles a Pseudodog but with white fur and shares many characteristics with its somewhat more common relative.
bloodsucker:The Bloodsucker is a semi-legendary creature, often used by Stalkers as a symbol of both the dangers and corruption of the Zone. This status has been achieved thanks to the species▒ relative rarity, as well as the fact that few humans who encounter Bloodsuckers survive to tell of it.Bloodsuckers often make lairs, in which they will dwell, while resting or storing their kill for later consumption. They also sleep standing up, but aren't known to do so heavily, as even something as quiet as a light footstep will instantly awaken them.
poltergeist:Supernatural in the eyes of some, invisible creatures haunting the deeper reaches of the Zone, usually haunting old, abandoned buildings. Nothing is known about their origin, although rumors in circulation claim they are spirits of stalkers hit by a massive wave of radiation. Their mysterious appearances and disappearances seem to correspond to the poltergeist legend, hence the name. Known encounters with poltergeists are quite diverse in fact: from mischievous laughter and blood-chilling howling, to deadly fireballs appearing out of nowhere. Unfortunately, all information about the poltergeist phenomenon originates from unclear and contradictory stories of questionable validity.
pseudogiant:The pseudogiant resembles a massive, drop-shaped abdomen with a pair of disproportionately large limbs. The limbs are arms and legs at the same time. The creature uses them to move around and grab its victims. An adult pseudogiant can weigh up to two tons and stand 2 meters tall. Their clumsy appearance might be deceiving, since they can move very rapidly if needed. Their muscles are exceptionally powerful and their bones are as hard as steel. The creature's brain is protected by a sturdy (up to 10 centimeters thick) skull, while many complex functions are controlled by the spinal medulla. Another astonishing feature of the beast is its ability to create local shock waves, which damage all living things in the vicinity.
burer:The result of Secret Service genetic experiments on criminals, under the program of human telekinesis development. A humanoid creature of hypertrophied complexion, clad in shreds of shabby overalls. Afraid of bright light, the Burer dwells in dark and gloomy undergrounds and caves. Feeds on dead bodies.
snork:The Snork is a horrifically mutated human soldier or Stalker, still wearing tattered remains of his uniform, boots and a GP-4 gas mask with cracked eyepieces, and a flailing hose. Exposure to radiation and anomalies in the wake of the second Chernobyl disaster has destroyed the human mind, leaving a feral, vicious beast psyche and a twisted body in its place, creating a dangerous predator. Snorks were first encountered on May 22, 2007, near one of the army posts at the 30th kilometer of the Zone, on the Kharkov side. An officer waiting for his shiftman's car near the post's gate was attacked by a snork, which slaughtered him with the rusty remains of a Izh 91 shotgun. The mutant was promptly gunned down by other soldiers.
zombified stalkers:Zombies are made by the "Psi Field" given off by psi emitters such as the Brain Scorcher in Lab X-19 and the Miracle Machine in Lab X16; when unprotected Stalkers are exposed to Psi emissions for a sufficient period of time, they start "to lose their minds". This results from irreversible damage to the higher functions of the brain, eventually resulting in a Zombified Stalker. Stalkers approaching the "Miracle Machine" Emitter of Lab X16 in the factory complex at Yantar reported that once they get close to the gate, they began to hear voices and hallucinate. Following this, they felt their brains literally boiling or melting inside their skulls, and they felt weak. If you are lucky enough to get away from the Psi field with your brain intact, you may also suffer from some detrimental side effects of exposure; for example, some Stalkers reported that they temporarily forgot their names after escaping the factory in time.
controller:The secret service's genetic experiments on criminals generated a new type of mutant. A rare mutant seen near to the center of the Zone, it bears a superficial resemblance to a humanoid with a disproportionately large head. Despite their appearance, they are highly intelligent, possess good perception and the ability to control the behaviour of less developed creatures. Mature specimens are capable of taking control of a human's mind. This is a formidable enemy, even the most experienced stalkers are afraid of meeting it. According to some stalkers, Controllers can make it seem that you are surrounded by your friends, but actually you are surrounded by zombies; or it might seem that you are walking on a pathway, but actually you are about to fall off a cliff.
izlom:An Izlom walks upright like most humanoid mutants, but will run on all four when attacking. It has one arm much longer than the other arm and has a very long neck. Izloms are not aggressive, they tend to avoid engagement with stalkers. They rarely attack unless one is very close to them, when they do attack they are quite fearsome with maddening zombified moans and they use their large arms to both block and beat the target up. Izloms appear to be neutral with Snorks, but hostile to Bloodsuckers.
karlik:Not much is known about Karlik, aside from the fact that it looks like a short mutated human. Its dwarf-like properties are somewhat reminiscent of the Burer.
zombie:The Brain Scorcher strips its victim of mind and reason, leaving only an empty, mindless shell. The brainless bodies then turn into zombies, following only the most basic instincts, wandering aimlessly around the Zone without weapons or clothing. Zombies are little more than sluggish walking corpses, caring only about food and sleep. They eat and drink just about anything they can get their claws on but the animation of them eating is not included, hence they are virtually soaked in radiation and toxic waste. Usually they roam the Zone without any apparent purpose, or just lie corpse-like in abandoned buildings. However, as soon as they sense the presence of a human being, they attack immediately. Experienced stalkers have learned to avoid them if they can.
pyrogeist:Appearing as a floating form of heat haze surrounded by a fiery glow, the Pyrogeists appear a lot like their telekinetic cousin. They are easily distinguishable from the latter with their orange glow instead of blue. On death, they explode in a mess of blood and fire somewhat similar to the way Poltergeists die. A Pyrogeists' primary and only attack is spawning pillars of fire, similar to Burner anomalies. While hard to shoot or aim at and being generally quite fast, they are far from invulnerable. A couple of shotgun blasts at close range or a couple of magazines from an assault rifle are usually all it takes to get rid of these mutants. It's an interesting note that despite not using telekinetic attacks like the more psychic Poltergeist, Pyrogeists are still capable of immense psychic prowess. For Pyrogeists are able to impede the player's progress by blocking off paths with a psychic wall or jamming a door telekinetically.
